The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Japanese New Year’s Festival,
Games and Pastimes, by Helen Gunsaulus

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Japanese New Year’s Festival, Games and Pastimes

Author: Helen Gunsaulus

Release Date: December 30, 2021 [eBook #67056]

Language: English

Produced by: Ronald Grenier (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/University of Illinois Libraries)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JAPANESE NEW YEAR’S
FESTIVAL, GAMES AND PASTIMES ***





                                The
                    Japanese New Year’s Festival,
                         Games and Pastimes

                                 BY
                         HELEN C. GUNSAULUS
               Assistant Curator of Japanese Ethnology

                   FIELD MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

                              CHICAGO

                                1923




                   Field Museum of Natural History
                     Department of Anthropology

                           Chicago, 1923

                         Leaflet Number 11

                  The Japanese New Year’s Festival,
                         Games and Pastimes


The Japanese prints with which we are most familiar in this country
are those known as _nishikiye_, literally “brocade picture.” Generally
speaking, they are portraits of actors and famous beauties or
landscapes and nature studies. There are, however, other woodcuts known
as _surimono_, “things printed,” whose subjects are characters known in
history and folklore, household gods, incidents in the daily life of
the people and the celebration of certain festivals, particularly that
of the New Year. From a careful study of these prints we may become
acquainted with many of the most distinctive customs of Japan.

Though produced by the same process as that used for the _nishikiye_,
_surimono_ may be easily distinguished from the former. In addition
to the series of wood blocks used to print the outline and colors of
the design, _surimono_ are often enriched by the application of metal
dusts and embossing. The decorative motive is usually interpreted or
accompanied by a poem or series of poems written in the picture. These
prints were not made for sale but were exchanged as gifts among poets
and artists on certain occasions, such as feasts, birthdays, theatrical
or literary meetings, and especially as cards of greeting presented at
the opening of the New Year. The _surimono_ in the collection in
Field Museum of Natural History were selected primarily with the view
of illustrating the customs and mode of living of the people of Japan
rather than of assembling together pictures which would be enjoyed for
their aesthetic appeal. While these prints are of an artistic nature,
they are valuable to an institution of this kind as approaches to the
study of the ethnology of Japan. The Museum is in possession of a
collection of three hundred and sixty prints which has been divided
into four groups, in the first of which the New Year’s festival and
certain games and pastimes are pictured to a considerable degree. This
selection is hung each year in Gunsaulus Hall (Room 30, Second Floor)
from January 1st to April 1st, when it is succeeded by another group.


THE NEW YEAR’S FESTIVAL

Of the many festivals enjoyed in Japan, none is attended with more
ceremony than that which opens with the New Year and is celebrated
with more or less formality for fourteen days. It was customary in the
old days to celebrate the New Year at the time when the plum first
blossomed and when winter began to soften into spring, somewhere
between the middle of January and the middle of February. Since the
adoption of the Gregorian calendar, this festival opens on January
1st, and is attended by many of the interesting ceremonies that were
practised in former times. On the thirteenth day of the preceding
month, a special stew (_okotojiru_) is made from red beans, potatoes,
mushrooms, sliced fish and a root (_konnyaku_). About this time a
cleaning of the house takes place. It is partly ceremonial and partly
practical, and is known as “soot-sweeping” (_susu-haraki_). Servants
are presented with gifts of money and a short holiday.

According to the lunar calendar, the New Year’s celebration was opened
by the ceremony known as _oniyarai_, “demon-driving.” This occurred at
Setsubun, the period when winter passed into spring, and to-day it is
generally practised at that time and is quite independent of the New
Year’s festival. In some sections of the country, however, it has been
moved forward to New Year’s eve, December 31st. As may be seen in the
first illustration, this ceremony consists of the scattering of parched
beans in four directions in the house, crying at the same time, “Out
with the devils, in with the good luck.” Though sometimes performed by
a professional who goes from door to door, this office is generally
carried on by the head of the family. The custom may be traced back to
ancient days when the demons expelled personified the wintry influences
and the diseases attendant on them. It is still customary in some
regions to gather up beans equal in number to the age plus one, and
wrap them with a coin in a paper which has been previously rubbed over
the body, to transfer ill luck. This package is then flung away at a
cross-roads, with the idea that thereby ill luck is gotten rid of.
Again in other places some of the beans are saved and eaten at the time
of the first thunder.

In Fig. 2 other interesting steps in the celebration may be studied.
Certain preparations for the demon-expelling ceremony are being made. A
woman who stands near a stove is parching the beans in a flat pan. At
her feet the box for the beans rests upon a low stand of the form known
as _sambo_, that used as the support for all ceremonial arrangements
on festive occasions. It is made of cypress wood; in this case it is
lacquered red but when holding offerings for the gods, it is left
unstained. It will be noticed that there is a charm stuck in at the
upper corner of the open door in this picture. It is composed of
a branch of holly on which is impaled the head of a sardine. This
charm, which is always placed in the lintel after the demons have been
driven out, is said to be repellent to evil influences and the prickly
holly has the property of keeping demons from reëntering the house.

Immediately over the woman’s head hangs one of the most conspicuous
objects associated with the New Year’s festival. It is the straw rope
(_shimenawa_) which is stretched before the entrance at the front
of the house, to remain during all the days of the celebration, and
keep out all evil spirits. Smaller straw ropes are placed over inner
doorways and before the household shrine or god-shelf (_kami-dana_).
They are also to be seen on the posts of certain bridges, particularly
the Gojōbashi in Kyōto. The _shimenawa_ is always made of straw twisted
to the left, the pure or fortunate side, with pendant straws at regular
intervals but of differing numbers in the order three, five, seven,
along the whole length of the strand. Alternating with these pendants
are leaves of the fern, _urajiro_. Since the fern-fronds spring in
pairs from the stem, this plant is symbolic of happy married life and
increase. The lanciform leaves attached to the straw rope in this
picture, are those of a laurel-like shrub called _yuzuri_. This plant
has been adopted as the symbol of a long united family because the old
leaves cling to the branch after the young ones have appeared. Other
objects with specific meanings are often attached to the rope, the most
common being paper cuttings (_gohei_) which represent the offerings
of cloth made to the gods in ancient times. Occasionally tied to the
rope are little bundles of charcoal (_sumi_) which, because of its
changeless color, symbolizes changelessness.

  [Illustration: FIG. 1. ONIYARAI CEREMONY.
  BY HOKKEI.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 2. PREPARING BEANS FOR ONIYARAI.
  BY HOKKEI.]

The origin of the use of _shimenawa_ on New Year’s day may be traced
back to mythological times when the Sun Goddess, Amaterasu, was
tempted forth from the cave into which, through fear of her brother,
she had retired. In order to entice her from her hiding place, all
the gods assembled together and, bringing with them a dancer, made
such a commotion that the “heavenly ancestor of the emperor” peeped
out. Her face was reflected in a mirror which they had hung upon a
tree. Never before had she gazed upon her own beauty, and thinking
it the countenance of a rival, she stepped forth. She was prevented
from returning by a fellow deity who stretched a straw rope across the
opening of her retreat. During her retirement all the earth had been
in darkness. As she emerged, the warm light of the sun spread over the
world and joy returned to the people.

A survival of the belief in this legend is to be seen to this day
at a certain spot on the shore of Owari Bay. There, at Futami, two
tower-like rocks, known at the “Husband and Wife Rocks” (Myōto-seki)
jut out of the waves close to the beach. They are joined together by a
straw rope which some say represents the bond of conjugal union. Others
see in it a hindrance against the entrance of the Plague God. However,
these rocks are popularly thought to represent the cave into which the
Sun Goddess retired. On this account many people journey to Myōto-seki
before dawn on New Year’s day, in order to see the first rays of the
sun emerge on the horizon between these two rocks, thereby witnessing
the re-appearance of the Sun Goddess who is restrained by the
_shimenawa_ from re-entering her retreat.

The fern leaves and _yuzuriha_, attached to the straw rope, are also
in evidence on certain ceremonial arrangements which are to be seen
in all households on New Year’s day. Two such objects are illustrated
in Fig. 3. They are called _o kazari mono_, “honorably decorated
thing.” Both of these stands of _sambo_ form are laid with paper covers
on which are placed rice puddings (_mochi_) of various forms. Those on
the stand at the left are large, flat and round, in shape representing
the mirror into which Amaterasu looked when she came forth from the
cave. Again they symbolize the sun, the _yo_ or male principle, and
the moon, the _in_ or female principle. They are adorned with two fern
leaves, a folded paper arrangement (called _noshi_) and a bitter orange
(_daidai_) to which are attached two _yuzuri_ leaves. The Japanese
are devoted to puns on words. _Daidai-yuzuri_, in pronunciation,
is identical with the phrase which means “bequeath from generation
to generation,” hence the adoption of the bitter orange with the
_yuzuri_ leaves in the New Year’s decoration. Dried chestnut kernels
(_kachiguri_) are often added to the arrangement, for the name suggests
the happy thought of victory (_kachi_). The second stand which holds
rice puddings is surmounted by a branch of pine, one of the well-known
emblems of longevity. The pine, bamboo and plum are arranged together
for this occasion and are known as _sho-chiku-bai_. At the base of the
pine in Fig. 3 and lying on fern leaves, is a lobster. On account of
the bent back and long tentacles it typifies a life so prolonged that
the body is bent over and the beard reaches to the waist. A lobster or
crayfish is often seen hanging to the center of the straw rope.

In the background of this picture, a set of bows and arrows used for
indoor practice may be seen leaning against a basket filled with square
rice cakes. In the foreground, a woman is seated before a chopping
board on which she cuts the rice cakes into small pieces. Being small
and hard, these bits are known as “hail mochi.” In some parts of Japan,
it is customary to eat them on the third day of the festival. A
companion who holds up a picture of the Sun Goddess, is seated near
a lantern, on the base of which rests a waterpot. It is likely that
this vessel contains the “young water” (_hatsumizu_) used for the New
Year’s tea (_fuku cha_, “good luck tea”). Custom decrees that this
water must be drawn from the well before the sun’s rays strike it. An
offering of rice is sometimes first thrown into the well. With the tea
is served a preserved plum (_umeboshi_), which, because of its wrinkled
skin, suggests the hope of a good old age. In addition, there is always
served on this festive day a fish stew known as _zoni_, and a special
spiced brand of wine called _toso_. In some households the first day
is devoted entirely to family devotion. Before the ancestral shrine
offerings of tea, mirror dumplings, _zoni_ and _toso_ are placed, and
then each living member is served in order of age with the same viands.
With the same respect for age, New Year’s greetings are spoken first
to the shrine, then to grandparents and parents and so on down to the
smallest child.

As we leave the house and go outdoors, we see before all portals
the “pine of the doorway” (_kado-matsu_)—pine and bamboo saplings
bound together and set up at either side of the entrance. The
pine on the left has a red trunk and is of the species _akamatsu_
(_pinus densiflora_); that on the right has a black trunk and is the
_kuro-matsu_ (_pinus thunbergii_). Fancy has attributed to the lighter
pine, the feminine sex, while the black pine is thought to represent
the masculine. Between these _kadomatsu_ is usually hung the straw rope
previously described. The two plants, the pine and bamboo, have no
religious significance but are emblematic of longevity and fidelity.
Long life and vigor are naturally suggested by the old and gnarled
evergreens; the reason why the bamboo should typify fidelity is less
obvious. It is again a case of a similar pronunciation of two Chinese
characters: _setsu_ meaning fidelity and _setsu_ denoting the node of
the bamboo. A _kado-matsu_ is pictured in the fourth illustration where
in the foreground two boys, bound together with a rope are testing
their strength. This common pastime for boys is called _kubi hiki_. A
third child, acting as umpire, holds in his hand a kite in the shape of
a bird.

The streets during the New Year’s festival are veritable playgrounds;
stilt walking, rope pulling and jumping, top spinning and ball playing
are all indulged in. Kite-flying is perhaps the most conspicuous sport,
for kites of many shapes and sizes are sent up by all lads on these
days. In Japan kite-flying is not only more picturesque than with us,
on account of the use of such fantastic forms as double fans, birds,
butterflies, cuttlefish or huge portraits of heroes in brilliant
colors and unusual proportions, but it is also apt to be a very
exciting sport. Occasionally opponents try to capture an enemy’s kite.
Competitive kite-flying is accomplished by covering the first ten or
twenty feet of the kite string with fish glue or rice paste, and then
dipping it into pounded glass or porcelain. On hardening, this portion
of the string becomes a series of tiny blades which when crossed with
another string at high tension can soon saw away the kite of the
adversary. It is also customary to attach a strip of whale bone or a
bow of bamboo to the large kites, so that on ascending a loud humming
is produced which adds to the excitement of the flight. Only boys and
men fly kites in Japan.

  [Illustration: FIG. 3. SAMBO AND MOCHI FOR NEW YEAR
  BY I-ITSU GETCHI ROJIN.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 4. KADO-MATSU, KITE AND ROPE PULLING.
  BY HOKKEI.]

The girls, dressed in their best costumes, are picturesque as they
play with a hand ball and at battledore and shuttlecock. The balls are
made of paper and wadding wound with silk of different colors.
The battle boards are of a white wood called _kiri_ and are often
elaborate affairs, adorned on one side with the portrait of a hero
made of colored silks. The shuttlecock is composed of the seed of the
soapberry, to which bright feathers are attached. On a _surimono_ in
this exhibition two girls are at play upon a red mat spread beneath the
blossoming plum tree. To one of the branches is clinging a nightingale,
the bird which heralds the approach of spring. All of the poems on
this _surimono_ treat of the New Year and the nightingale’s song. One,
literally translated, reads, “Spring’s first wind melting the snow,
let laugh the plum, let cry the nightingale.” Another rendered in
English is as follows: “Like the comical manner of a bouncing ball, the
nightingale’s song rolls (like a ball) on the plum branch.”

Young maidens carrying flat bamboo baskets make excursions into the
country to gather the seven spring grasses (_nanakusa_). These greens,
the water drop-wort, shepherd’s purse, radish, celery, dead-nettle,
turnip and rock-cress, are the components which are needed for the
celebration of the first of the five festivals known as _Go-sekku_.
This one occurs on the seventh day of the first month.

While the young people enjoy these pastimes out of doors, within the
house the older members of the family indulge in the writing of a
New Year’s poem or in playing one of the games described in the next
section of this leaflet. The writing of poems at this auspicious time
is almost universal, indeed, the composing of poetry and the mastery
of caligraphy are considered as necessary accomplishments for the
cultured person. The most common form of New Year’s poem is that known
as _tanka_. It is a poem of five lines, the first and third of which
contain five syllables, the other three seven, and is the poem
almost always found on _surimono_. Poems are often inscribed on fans as
in Fig. 5, where one young woman meditates over the verse which she has
written on a fan. A companion seated at a writing table, is grinding
ink with one hand and holding with the other a poem paper (_tanzaku_).
Such long strips are to be seen in many houses awaiting the New Year’s
inspiration. They are sometimes tinted to a soft shade or ornamented
with appropriate New Year’s flowers or with silver clouds as in
this case. One of the poems accompanying this _surimono_ is worthy
of translation: “From the window, lighting the brush for the first
writing, the plums’ fragrance on the wind is blowing.”

On the first day of the year, musicians and dancers proceed from house
to house. The musician, wearing a flat straw hat which partially covers
her face, charms away birds of ill omen with a few strains played on
the samisen. The dancers are either those known as _manzai_ or are
those who enact the lion dance, a performance adopted from China.
(Costumes used in the lion dance of China may be seen in Case 5, Hall
I, ground floor.) With the majority of families much of the day is
spent in paying visits to friends, at which times it is customary to
present small gifts, usually of trifling value such as conserves,
fruit, fish, persimmons, herring roe, bean-curd, towels and similar
articles. Presents are either placed on trays in ceremonial form or
carefully wrapped in paper or silk and tied with red and white cords.

Accompanying every gift there is always a quiver-shaped envelope of
folded paper called _noshi_, in which is inserted a strip of dried
_haliotis_ or _awabi_. This odd custom, like so many others, has an
interesting significance. The strip of _haliotis_ is symbolic of long
life and durability of affection, because it is capable of being
stretched to great length. The single shell of this mollusk also
suggests singleness of affection. In the ancient days when Japan was
a nation of fishermen, a piece of dried _awabi_ was indeed a valuable
gift. In the present use of the _noshi_ and _awabi_, some say that the
Japanese would recall the primitive days, thereby preserving the virtue
of humility. Another conspicuous object which is usually in evidence
at New Year’s is the small treasure boat (_takarabune_) sometimes made
of straw and symbolizing the coming of the “Seven Gods of Good Luck”
_Shichifukujin_. Pictures of _takarabune_ are placed beneath the pillow
with the wish that the New Year’s dream may be a fortunate one.

No work is done on the first day of the festival, even the sweeping
of the house is omitted, lest some good fortune be scattered to the
winds. All stores are closed to regular business. On the second day a
pretense is made toward returning to normal life. The musician takes
out his instrument, the student looks into his books, the artist gets
out his brushes and the merchant distributes his goods from gaily
colored handcarts. The storehouse of treasures is opened and enjoyed
on this day as well, rarely on the first day for fear good fortune
and wealth should flee away. The large mirror dumplings are taken
from the ceremonial stands and from before the family shrine on the
fourth day, and cut into small pieces known as “teeth-strengtheners.”
On this day also, the fire brigades of Tōkyō march in procession and
perform gymnastic feats. At early dawn on the seventh day the master
of the house, who follows the old customs closely, arises and goes to
the kitchen where he washes the seven spring herbs (_nanakusa_) in
the first water drawn from the well. He then chops them on a board,
moving his knife in time with a certain incantation concerned
with cheating any birds of ill omen which might come to the country.
The chopped herbs are boiled in a kind of rice gruel and served with
ceremony at the breakfast. On the eleventh day the military men used
to offer mirror dumplings before their armor. The long celebration of
the festival is finally brought to a close with the burning of the
_kado-matsu_ and other decorations on the fourteenth or fifteenth day
of the first month.


                         GAMES AND PASTIMES

Several of the most popular games of Japan are represented on
_surimono_ and only those games will be mentioned herein. To those who
would study the subject exhaustively, S. Culin’s “Corean Games” is
recommended. With the possible exception of chess (shogi), no game is
more widely played than _go_, which has been erroneously identified
with the game _gobang_, somewhat similar to our game of checkers. _Go_,
a far more difficult contest than that European game, was introduced
into Japan from China in the eighth century. For generations it has
occupied the attention of the Japanese, there being clubs and schools
devoted to the playing of _go_. It is played on a square, raised wooden
board on which nineteen straight lines drawn from one side to the other
of the board cross nineteen other lines drawn at right angles, making
three hundred and sixty-one crosses on which the men are placed. One
hundred and eighty white, and one hundred and eighty-one black stones,
are used in the playing. These represent respectively day and night;
the crosses represent three hundred and sixty degrees of latitude and
the central intersection stands for the primordial principle of the
universe. The object of the game is to capture the opponent’s pawns by
enclosing at least three crosses around his stone, and to cover as
much of the table as possible. Military men have always been devotees
to the game of _go_, seeing in it the rudimentary tactics necessary for
successful warfare.

  [Illustration: FIG. 5. THREE GIRLS WRITING NEW YEAR’S POEMS.
  BY KATSUCHIKA HOKUSAI.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 6. GAME OF JUROKU MUSASHI.
  BY HOKUSAI SORI.]

_Juroku musashi_ (“sixteen knights”) is a favorite New Year’s game
which is illustrated in Fig. 6. It is played on a board divided into
diagonally-cut squares. One player holds sixteen round paper pawns
representing sixteen knights; the opponent has but one large piece
known as the general (_taisho_) which has the power to capture enemy
pieces when they are immediately on each side of it with a blank space
beyond. The holder of the smaller pieces seeks to completely hedge in
and thereby capture the big piece.

_Sugoroku_ (“double sixes”) is similar to the European “race-game.” It
is played with dice and the succeeding spaces on the board generally
represent the stations of a journey. Brinkley, in his Japan and China
(Vol. VI, p. 56), tells us that this game was imported from India
in the eighth century and was at first prohibited on account of its
gambling character. Eventually the Buddhist priests took it up and
converted it into an instrument for inculcating virtue by making the
spaces on the board represent a ladder of moral precepts which marked
the path to victory. _Sugoroku_, with the travel board, is commonly
played by children at New Year’s time. The name is also given to the
more difficult game of backgammon which may be studied in one of the
_surimono_ in this museum. The board on which the game is being played
is now obsolete. It is divided longitudinally into two fields with an
intervening space between. Each field has twelve narrow subdivisions in
which the men are placed.

Games of cards (_karuta_ from the Spanish _carta_) are altogether
different from the European card games, though it is commonly
supposed, on account of the derivation of this name, that card playing
was introduced in the sixteenth century by Portuguese travelers. It
is interesting to note here that card playing was known in China in
the twelfth century. It would seem that Japan must have made her
first contact with the game through a source other than Spain, for
the majority of the forms and methods of her playing cards in no way
reflect European influence. The fact that cards are quite often called
_fuda_ (“ticket”) would also add in casting doubt on the European
origin. The _hana-garuta_ or “flower cards” which are widely played are
small in size, black on the backs and adorned on the face with flowers
and emblems belonging to the twelve months. A set comprises forty-eight
cards and the values vary from one to twenty points. The game consists
in drawing, playing and matching in suits or in groups.

In the game of _uta garuta_ (“poem cards”), there are two hundred
cards. One hundred of these are decorated with portraits of poets
and the first two lines of famous classic verses. These are to be
matched with the corresponding hundred on which the remaining lines
of the poems are inscribed. Of the many ways of playing _uta garuta_,
_chirashi_, “spread out,” is the most exciting. The cards bearing the
last part of the poems are laid face up on the floor. Those inscribed
with the first lines are held by the “reader,” who reads them aloud one
by one. The other players strive to pick up the corresponding card and
he who at the last holds the most is declared winner.

Somewhat similar to _uta garuta_ is the game of _kai awase_ (“shell
matching”). Three hundred and sixty bivalve shells are used for this
game. The two sides are separated and on the upper half is painted a
portrait of a poet, on the mated shell are the lines of one of
his poems. Other sets have only the poems inscribed within them, the
two first lines being on one half shell, the remaining lines on the
other. The shells are divided among the players, and as the pictures
or first lines are laid upon the mats, the holder of the corresponding
poem places his shell near it. Some of the old _kai awase_ sets were
of great beauty and were stored in circular lacquer cases of fine
workmanship. This game and the _uta garuta_ naturally were played only
by the cultured classes and were vehicles for the learning of the
classics.

In addition to the kites and battledores, stilts and hand balls, there
are represented in this selection of _surimono_ other toys for children
such as hobby horses, dolls of paper, swinging bats for ball playing,
archery outfits and the amusements afforded by caged singing insects
and trained mice and monkeys. The older people likewise have delightful
pastimes. As the season advances they spend much time in enjoying
nature, the viewing of blossoming trees and plants, the listening to
singing insects in the evening, and the gathering of shells and shell
fish at ebb-tide are all occasions of organized parties in which men
as well as women take keen pleasure. A series of five _surimono_ by
Kuniyoshi realistically portrays the joys of an ebb-tide party.

Most of the musical instruments, which both men and women enjoy
playing, are importations from China, particularly the lyre (_koto_),
the violin (_kokyū_) and the reed organ (_shō_). The samisen, a
three-stringed guitar, is the popular accompaniment of the singing girl
or geisha; the _koto_ is played by the more aristocratic women. Drums
of double conical form (_tsuzumi_) are to be seen in the hands of both
men and women. Flutes have long been popular with men of all classes,
the wandering minstrel, the court musician and even the courtier
himself who delighted to match the softness of his flute tone with the
gentle light of the moon, or with the voice of the harbinger of spring
as evidenced by the poem on Fig. 7 which reads: “Like the nightingale’s
voice above the clouds, hazed over by the mist, the flute contains
sweetness.”

Even more aesthetic than the enjoyment of music are the arts of the
ceremonial tea (_cha no yu_, “hot-water-tea”) and that of flower
arrangement (_ikebana_), both of which up to a short time ago were
thought to be necessary acquirements for the cultivated classes. To
each of these sciences many schools were devoted. Only the barest
sketch can here be given of these subjects to which volumes have been
devoted. The tea ceremony to-day is rigorously outlined by complicated
rules as to utensils, order of procedure and even as to the subjects of
conversation indulged in while in the tea room.

Tea drinking was introduced from China in the ninth century and at
first was practised by the Buddhist priests for medicinal purposes
and especially as a means of keeping awake during meditations. In
the fifteenth century meetings for tea drinking were held in groves
and gardens. In an adjoining tea house pictures were shown on these
occasions which were mainly Buddhistic in subject, and most of them of
Chinese origin. Under the great tea-master Rikyū (sixteenth century)
the rules of _cha no yu_ were rewritten. From this time on the
ceremony was performed in a small house with a low door through which
the few guests would have to prostrate themselves for entrance. The
most characteristic traits of these gatherings were a close sympathy
with nature and a love of simplicity almost amounting to ruggedness
as expressed in the tea bowls often partially glazed. Restraint was
likewise displayed in the decorations of the room, a simple bamboo
flower holder was preferred to the bronze vase, and a hanging picture
(_kakemono_) was chosen which would make an equally quiet appeal, such
as a branch in the wind or an example of fine caligraphy. The occasion
became a time in which to worship purity and refinement.

  [Illustration: FIG. 7. NOBLEMAN PLAYING THE FLUTE.
  BY GAKUTEI.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 8. YOUNG MAN ARRANGING FLOWERS.
  ARTIST UNKNOWN.]

Like the tea ceremony, the art of flower arrangement (_ikebana_)
developed into a philosophy under the patronage of the shōgun Yoshimasa
in the fifteenth century. For several centuries it has been studied
and cultivated as a refined accomplishment. Miss Averill in “Japanese
Flower Arrangement” tells us that many of Japan’s most celebrated
generals have been masters of this art, finding that it calmed their
minds and made clear their decisions for the field of action. All of
the schools of _ikebana_, with one exception, are founded on the same
principles. The underlying idea is to reproduce in the arrangement the
effect of growing plants and to preserve for as long a time as possible
the life of the plants. Arrangements aim to reflect the season or the
occasion. When high winds prevail in March, branches with unusual
curves are selected and so placed as to suggest strong breezes. Certain
colors are considered unlucky for certain occasions, for example, red
suggesting flames is inappropriate for house warmings, when white would
be the desirable color in that it suggests water to quench the fire.
An uneven number of flowers are considered lucky and also much more
suggestive of the processes of nature, where there is seldom found
perfect symmetry and actual balance. In the arrangements of the later
schools there are always represented three principles known in the
different groups by diverse names: “Heaven, Man and Earth;” “Earth,
Air and Water;” or “Father, Mother and Child.” The three main sprays
of an arrangement represent in their directions of growth these
three principles, and are designated: “standing, growing, running.”
Subsidiary branches in the selection are called attributes. As may be
seen in Fig. 8, an arrangement is first composed in the hands, care
being taken that all branches be kept close together at the base so
as to form “the parent stalk”. The young man in the picture holds in
his mouth a support for bracing the flowers in the bronze vase, on
the floor are scissors. A woman is approaching with a waterpot. Such
a refined pastime as _ikebana_ is primarily intended to entertain
visitors who may contemplate the finished arrangement as it is set up
in the raised portion (_tokonoma_) of the main room.

Helen C. Gunsaulus




Transcriber’s Notes.


  1. Italicized text is indicated with leading and trailing underscores.

  2. The author sometimes uses dashes within compound Japanese words
  (e.g. kado-matsu “doorway-pine”) to emphasize the separate words.
  This has been retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JAPANESE NEW YEAR’S
FESTIVAL, GAMES AND PASTIMES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
